Hey,
this is jad very proud to present to you guys starting today here on radio lab
and mini series from producer Molly Webster.
It's been the Michael [inaudible] as a fish [inaudible]
go to four saw
[inaudible].
Hi voided to carry you all.
Love you. How old are you?
Hi, I'm Molly Webster.
The last time
[inaudible]
I dunno, I'd say three years I've been,
yes.
[inaudible]
[inaudible] doing a lot of reporting about how humans make more of themselves,
right? Like science stories, ethical stories.
And we came up with this idea that, you know,
rather than me reporting only on reproduction for the next 10 years or radio
lab, that what if we just put them all together in a series.
And so we're about to do that for the next month.
We're going to do this series and the name of the series is
ahead.
D
I know you're thinking why I'm gonna ask you a question. You can say no.
What do you think about the word gonads? Goon donuts. Oh,
that's crazy question. It's almost like that word moist.
It gives you like a little, yes.
That word does have certain connotations. What do you think of? Go?
Isn't that nuts? It's a slang term for balls, balls, testicles, testicles,
balls. Definitely balls. Definitely walls you got going on.
It's like just using like stupid boy humor.
Almost like toxic masculinity situation.
You just think like sweaty balls in male jokes pretty much like kick you in the
Nads. Great. Would you think it has anything to do with ladies? No.
No, no. Oh No. Did you know that? Um,
ladies actually have gonads also.
The gonads are both testes and ovaries. Oh really?
That it's actually for men and women. Really?
I did not know that. I did not know that. I did not know that
90% of the people I talked to didn't and all that. They didn't know it.
Who would've thought?
Women and men both have gonads culture stolen the word native mail.
And I think it's time we reclaimed this word like as a citizen,
as a human, as a lady, as a science lover.
I'm taking the word back.
Go.
Oh, okay.
So this is episode one and this whole series like kind of came into being,
um, with a single phrase. All right. The duck is in the house
from this guy.
Can you say for me your name and how you identify yourself?
I'm [inaudible], I am an ovarian biologists,
so I have a, a research laboratory, uh, at Yale University School of medicine.
So [inaudible] he is the one who said that. Yeah, go on. Ads are magical.
Oregon's,
they are ads are magical. Oregon
[inaudible]
so octane is Turkish. You know, I was a curious kid. He grew up in his temple.
I was at trache as a child and as name and I was 10 years old.
I would, you know, you know, look into universe in disguise and,
and trying to understand or, you know, make,
make sense out of this whole thing.
What was it about the sky that attracted you? It was the concept of infinity.
You know,
we're just living a mundane life on this planet without thinking of anything but
our routine concerns. But at the same time, I mean,
you've got this vast space around this and most of you have no clue.
We live oblivious to that fact.
And I would lose a sleepover that when I was a kid. Yeah.
Fast forward act take goes to medical school in Turkey. He becomes a doctor,
specifically an ob Gyn. So I had to deliver a lot of babies,
a probably 20,000 or so.
That's like bursting a small town. And then you know, having,
after having made 20,000 delivery, I said, you know, perhaps, uh,
this is not my calling. I want us to be a little bit more, uh,
more towards the beginning of the process. You know,
when you're an obstetrician, you're dealing with the finished product. Right.
Well,
I just think that's a crazy statement because most people think babies are the
very beginning of the process.
I'm not sure what gets more beginning than like a small baby popping out of a
lady that feels, feels like the starting line. We started something.
But in [inaudible] case there was like some sense that most of the decisions,
most of something had already been decided by the time the baby gets out.
And that whole process is a, uh, fascinating.
So we dragged him into the studio to talk about the same magical gonads
basically just to figure out why are they magical.
I'm interested how you settled on word. Yeah. What did I say? You know,
I think magical for many reasons. One is their origin, you know, they,
and he told me what he learned when he started studying this stuff was that the
origin of the gonad like its creation is sort of the beginning because it starts
with this whole saga that is so involved and so extreme that the baby itself
does kind of feel like an afterthought.
[inaudible]
he calls it the great migration.
The great migration octane got me into the story.
And so Andy up calling a bunch of people about it.
In my lab we have a slogan that says gonads or go home. We have tee shirts.
You don't, you do.
We have a tee shirt that is blanche Capel professor in cell biology at Duke
University Medical Center.
She essentially studies all the parts of the story we're about to tell you.
Okay,
so to place this story in time that begins that about oh two or three weeks.
And humans. I bet. Let's say day 24 just to be safe,
which basically means a sperm fertilized an egg 23 days ago.
It could be a petri dish, it could be sex, who knows,
but inside this woman's uterus,
there is a little organism that has been growing for 24 days.
What does the embryo look like at that point? That's my comrade in arms.
Pat Walters, who's the editor of the series, Gosh,
I don't know how to describe this very well to you. I could send you a picture.
Does it kind of look like a tadpole? Exactly. That's not so wrong.
It looks like a tadpole and if you look at very early embryo,
it's like curled up. There's a tail, got a little tail. There's like the,
the sort of ball of the embryo that's like forming the developing body and then
it has this like sweep of a tail that's coming off and if you zoom into the
tail, you'll see a little region.
It's called the Allen Toe is called the Allen Toe is,
which is the trash bag of the embryo
before the embryo has an excretory system.
It dumps things that it doesn't want in the Allen toes.
Urine flows in and out there.
It's where gas exchange with the mother happens.
So kind of a terrible place. It's like a foreign planets.
This isn't actually part of the embryo itself. No,
it's sort of in the hinterlands.
The Allen Toast I always imagined was is, is the
where Harrison Ford was camped out in blade runner 2049 which is like that vast
dust desert. Super Orange dust. Yeah.
And there's like um,
windstorms and and like wind blowing over the desert.
I imagine it like that.
And it's here where you find some cells,
these very specialized cells, germ cells, the germ cells, germ cells.
These are the,
that are going to go on that great migration and put the magic in the Gonad.
They, they're very interesting cell type there.
They're set aside very early in embryogenesis. And how many are there?
They're like a thousand.
It's not that 2000 or I think they're something like 40 wheat. That's it. Or,
yes, 40 biblical number. And the irony here is,
is these cells sort of like huddled at the edges of this wasteland,
might actually be the most important cells in the body.
[inaudible]
because after the embryo grows, after the baby gets born,
after that baby goes through puberty, and one day maybe decides to have a kid,
these cells which are present at the very beginning,
these cells are in charge of making a next generation of you.
I mean, that's the meaning of life, right? That's the origin of life.
These cells, everything else, and we think it's brain, heart, et cetera.
But I think everything else is there to support.
The survival of the germ cell
are the stem cell of the species, right?
So stem cell means a cell that can create other cells and originator cell.
We have stem cells for lungs, stem cells for heart stem cells for neurons.
These cells are the only cells that can make on their own.
All the other kinds of cells, they can make a whole person. So it's a,
they have a remarkable underlying pluripotency. Mm.
Do you think they know that? While that's a,
I mean that those are very difficult questions to answer. I don't know.
I think germ cells know they're really special cells,
but I don't think they know what they're going to become.
We can ask the question if they're so special,
why do they start out in the trash? Yeah, that seems like a bad place.
You would think it's very curious that the germ cells arise near that position
and it's unclear why or you hide your most precious object in the trash dump as
I'm the, I'm like, this is like God, like the best GV mission.
Impossible like murder on the Orient Express.
Maybe that's the plan. I don't know in all seriousness,
but for some reason scientists don't know exactly why.
It seems like evolution has decided to set these cells aside at the beginning of
development,
which means they have to make a journey back to the middle of the embryo where
their destinies will be revealed. And if they make it there, we make it there.
If they don't [inaudible].
Okay. Okay. So, so they hang around this dusty wasteland for a few days,
huddled against the elements. I wonder what that's like for them.
I imagine if I was in that situation, I would just like be like wondering how I,
this was my lot in life. Is this some sort of cosmic joke guy?
The sense, I have a sense I made the important, but I'm just here.
Don't know why in the wasteland.
So they hang out like that for a couple of days. And then
[inaudible]
there's a call the here call it maybe smell call. Let's see here.
There's a signal there called into action and so the cells start migrating.
They literally move. Wow. What, wait. So how does this sell? March?
They actually extend Filopodia, uh, which are little, a cell like feet.
Okay. Is it like a pops out two feet and then it goes walking? Um,
cells send out extensions and that extension has a little adhesion molecule on
it, like a little sticky spot. So when it puts its foot out,
it can pull the rest of the cell up to it. So they take a hike,
hike, hike, hike.
And interestingly the germ cells seem to be holding hands like a long string of
paper dolls and they touch each other. It's as though they are.
The whole crowd is like going together and after a bit of a hike they get to the
wall of the embryo which is like, I don't know,
pulsating math and somehow this is a very blurry period.
I have to say they
push their way through the wall and on the other side
it's just chaos there.
It's like a foreign plants because what's happening is I knew that the embryo is
just like dividing, dividing, dividing, dividing, dividing.
You know the whole embryo is developing very fast at this stage trying to start
forming parts like once a form Oregons and wants to form a nervous system are
all kinds of signals flying around to tell the gut to form and to tell the liver
to form. Blood cells are popping up neurons,
you know all these signals are flashing all around and yet the germ cells,
their job is to block it all out.
They migrate right down the middle of the embryo at the midline.
Almost like where you could think like a spine would be through a forest of
signals going around in the embryo and the signals are prom farting.
Trying to temp them like, hey, be a liver cell,
be a liver cell, come be a liver, be liver, and sometimes these cells and like,
hmm, wait, do I want to be all over? Am I a liver?
No, wait, something tells me as you keep marching, it seems scary, doesn't it?
Yeah, yeah. They go through a battle, Hey,
do you know if they ever lose one along the way?
Like the chain is going and they're trying to like don't differentiate or
differentiate this. Like the fourth one from the end ever go like, Ooh,
just become a stomach. And they're like, oh crap, we lost Stan.
Keep hurry, hurry. It probably happens.
But they try to stay focused together and they tried to resist all of those
signals that could divert them from their destiny.
They want to stay uncommitted.
These might be the last cells in the developing mammalian embryo to give up
their world. Of Possibilities.
This is David Page.
He is the director of the Whitehead Institute biologist at MIT,
if you see what I'm saying. So basically when a,
when an egg is fertilized by a sperm, to go back to the,
that beginning, um, the resulting cell called a Zygote,
the fertilized egg has the possibility,
has the potential to become every type of cell on the body and as one cell
becomes two and two become four and so on and so on,
eventually some cells give up that broad range of possibilities and become
committed to narrower occupations and specializations. You know,
we have at least 200 or 300 specialized cell types that make up our body.
All the other cells make the transition from possibility to reality.
And those migrating primordial germ cells are the last cells to give up a wide
range of possibilities.
Oh, I liked it in further. Like pugnaciousness.
Yes, yes.
Okay. So getting back to the band of 40, we're back in the thick of things with,
you're marching through the middle of the embryo being like pelted and torn at
fighting off all these other six nols. And they do this for one day,
two days, three days, right? Four,
five. I imagine they get tired as they go. Six,
seven Oh eight.
But the signal that they're following is getting stronger.
[inaudible]
and then pretty soon
over the horizon on kind of either side of the path,
they start to see these mountains,
urogenital ridge is going to emerge as sort of a mountain off the back wall of
the body cavity.
Yeah. Um,
[inaudible]
so they're still marching down this path. They're following the signal.
The mountains are getting closer and closer, and then at some point,
the path in front of them splits, it goes to the left and it goes to the right.
And half the cells would go to the left and half the cells would go to the
right, regardless of what direction they go in.
They end up at the base of a mountain and the mountain is a mass of like a dense
mass of cells and they come right up to the edge of the mountain wall and
they're able to just like
push those cells
aside and like squeeze in
to the interior of the mountain.
[inaudible],
which is an entirely new space.
So the germ cells enter,
enter the Gonad. Oh, this is the gonad? Yeah.
This is the place that will either be an ovary or testes in which I mean it
hasn't been figured out, which it is. No. At this point it could go either way.
I think about this place as a cathedral and the cathedral,
it's sort of under construction and as they walk in they,
they probably know immediately that this is the place that's been calling them
because that's signal that they've been following. It's everywhere.
[inaudible]
maybe when they get to the Gonad,
the whole cell is surrounded by the signal and that tells the cell to stop.
But this is just a guess. What do you think it's like for the,
for the germ cells, like sort of,
they've been going on this walk and then they get to a place that says,
stay here. So I wonder what the stay here like.
I Dunno feels like, oh, I think it feels like home.
[inaudible]
after marching for almost two solid weeks,
they finally arrive. They recognize this is where they belong.
But everyone I talked to said probably still at this point,
they don't even know what lies ahead for them or even why they're there.
We're anthropomorphizing, but why not? Um, David Page again,
I would suggest that the primordial germ cells,
they have been instructed to migrate to the genital rich,
but they don't know why and they don't know what they're gonna do. Um,
when they get there, they have not a clue,
but the clue is coming.
No,
she eats going at [inaudible]. It's good.
This is Jefferson calling from grand island at Bradfield radio that presents go
now it's supported in park like science handbook.
It's the fireman foundation initiative dedicated to engaging everyone with the
process of finding additional support for radio that is provided by
Alfred p Lone Foundation. Oh,
hi. I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Casper.
As we continue listening to this episode on
reproduction and the human body,
check out the Casper mattress with zone support for your hips and shoulders for
better alignment or the wave which mirrors the natural shape of your body.
You can be sure of your purchase with Casper's 100 night risk-free sleep on a
trial right now. Get $50 towards select mattresses by visiting
casper.com/radio lab and using code radio lab at checkout terms and conditions
apply. Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by audible as we continue this gonads episode on
reproduction and development. Checkout how we do it,
the evolution and future of human reproduction by Robert Martin.
How we do it provides even more context for our reproductive and child rearing
practices and what it all means for the future of our species.
Go to audible.com/radiolab or text radials up to 500 500 for a free 30 day trial
and a free audio book
[inaudible].
Okay, so to pick up on the action,
the tribe of 40 they find themselves in this cathedral like space technical
name, the mess and effort Gonadal region,
I'll call it the house of Gonad [inaudible]. They're in this beautiful space.
They don't know why,
but what happens is immediately when they enter,
they are surrounded by somatic cells.
I imagine these cells as like friendly monks.
Just gliding around in red roads.
Their job is to just protect you and make sure that nothing bad happens to you.
So these are the cells that have been calling them. I don't know.
That's kind of a hard question to answer because the genital Ridge had just
started forming when the germ cells began their migration.
So no one really knows like what was sending the signal.
But after a few days, some people say a few weeks,
these somatic cells that are gathered around the germ cells will lean in real
close and they reveal the destiny.
They tell them either one of two things.
Yes,
you will become a sperm
[inaudible]
or you will become an egg.
what exactly are these bunk cells doing though? I mean, uh,
t to make them change. Are they like bumping them in some special way or no, no,
no, no. They're releasing proteins. Well,
there are molecular signaling cascades that are controlling the male or female
fate of the, of the germ cells and what makes them go one way or the other. Oh,
that is super complicated. And we're going to get into it later. In the series.
So for now I'll just say in mammals,
sexes genetically controlled by whether or not you have two x chromosomes or an
x and a y chromosome.
So it's just basically like your fourth grade biology of the cells in the
Cathedral have a y chromosome though they'll say sperm.
And if the cells in Cathedral have an XX chromosome, they'll say egg.
So it's still basically just fate in luck as to why, which way they go. Yes.
But here's the cool part.
If the amongst held the germ cells that they're going to be sperm, they,
they basically divide a little bit and then amongst like take the germ cells and
they put them to sleep. They sort of,
I dunno in tomb them in these catacombs until uh,
after birth and puberty.
But if the germ cells get told that they're going to be eggs,
something different happens inside of them and they just
go
nuts.
[inaudible]
they divide, they divide quite a lot rapidly for a while.
Suddenly the band of 40 becomes thousand and 2000 and 10,000.
The monks then take each of these new eggs and embed them in the wall of the
cathedral divide. Boom, divide, boom, divide,
divide, boom. They literally shove the eggs into the wall of the house of Gona.
Yes, and this goes on for months. As a matter of fact,
their numbers probably reach around six to 10 million.
You're in the fifth month of pregnancy, about 20 weeks of gestation.
That embryonic ovaries going to have all the eggs they will ever have when it's
only five months along with this is all still in utero. This is all in utero.
It's happening.
It has 10 million eggs and it is still itself months away from being born. Yes.
Theoretically at that point,
that is 500 times more babies than octane ever delivered in his career in this
one developing embryo. Fuck yeah, I know.
Cause you know what?
It just occurred to me like if you go all the way back to the beginning of this
story, you told day 24 or whatever it was,
you've got this little organism forming.
Probably the mother doesn't even know it's there yet,
but already there are these cells
in existence that will be the kid of the kid.
She doesn't even know she has yet. So her grandkids are in there already.
Is that right? So when you're pregnant with a person you carry inside of you,
the cells that will make the next, oh, you're right, it is granddaughter.
It's like your grandkids are already inside of you. Inside of your unborn child.
Yes. That's bananas. Yes. You think the great grandkids are in there too?
Well, it's like all this. That's what she means by stem cell of the species,
because
it's the same material that makes they then they not only make the body,
they make more eggs and sperm, they make the next generation of egg and sperm.
So they're so they're, so they're both making a generation,
but then making the ability for that generation to make another generation.
Oh my God, this is like, so it is. It's mirrors.
You're not only cradling like your child,
you're cradling like infinite future.
Homosapiens wow. Well that's the infinity. It's crazy that all that is there.
And you're not even a faint yet that the first thought or thought, I don't know.
The first thing that this PR organism has been programmed to do is not, hey,
make a, make a person, make a brain, make a life. No, it's make more. Yeah.
It's pretty gnarly. Yeah. You know, many,
many people believe that we exist just as a harbor for our germ cells until we
can make new people like we're just their hosts in some sense.
That's absolutely true. I mean, or as as was said a long time ago,
um, a chicken is an eggs way of making another egg.
Really? I've never heard that before.
[inaudible]
so I was in Michigan a couple of weeks and months ago and so I was in Michigan
and I was kayaking on this river that has super sandy bottom and it's a pretty
shallow, I don't know, it's like three or four feet deep.
And the cool thing was that, um,
the salmon responding huge fish,
they were like three to four feet. They were so thick around and,
and there was so many of them that they would like Russel my kayak and I see
something kind of in this one part of the river like by itself and I look and
it's a fish.
It's a salmon that's lying on the bottom of the um,
river and uh, I see like through the ripple, the water, um, some like pink.
So I turned the kayak around to go like look at it.
And what I realize is the pink is not like flesh.
The pink is like packed eggs.
The body was sliced open so you could see into the hollow and in the hollow were
just like what felt like millions of these like bubble gum,
pink drops of eggs.
Like the entire body cavity was packed eggs.
And to think that parts of our body, male and female, by the way, because the,
the testes do this just little later, um,
in life to think that parts of our body are like that fish.
It felt like just pulling back the curtain and seeing something that I,
I can never unsee.
Oh
cool.
This episode was reported by me,
Molly Webster and produced by Jad Abumrad with additional scoring and mixing by
dealing p original music,
including the ballot of the fish was produced by Alex over in 10 and son by
major Connery Radiolab presents.
Gonads is produced by Rachel Cusick and edited by Pat Walters.
One last thing before I go. Later in the series we're going to dig into sex ed.
And one of the things that comes up in every conversation you have about sex ed
is a book that somebody read to learn about the birds and the bees.
It might've been given to them or they found it like in their library book sale.
Um,
so we want to try and create an online sex ed library with as many of these
books as we can find for all ages.
So go to radiolab.org/sex ed books and tell us about a book you got as a kid and
the reason you loved it or didn't and then we're going to add it to the chef and
it's going to be great. Um, so that's it. That's our episode.
And see you next time. Bye.
This is Katrina calling from New York City where you live with treated by Jada
at Vermont, and it's produced by Soren Wheeler.
Now let me keep the out directors found design. Maria Madis.
DARPA Dei is our managing director. Our staff includes Simon Adler.
Now he wrote Homo. That's a Breslin, Rachael Cusick, David Campbell,
Bessel happy Tracy Hunt, Matt Kielty, Robert Krulwich,
any McEwen Latif, Nasser, Melissa O'Donnell, Adrianne Walk,
Pat Walters,
and Maldi Webster with help from Shima only eat harder hodge in lies a Jaeger.
Our fact checker is Michelle Harris.
Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich. Radiolab is supported by Casper.
Checkout the Casper or the wave mattress with a support system that mirrors your
body shape.
Get $50 towards select mattresses by visiting casper.com/radiolab and using code
Radiolab at checkout terms and conditions apply. Hi, I'm Robert Krulwich.
Radiolab is supported by audible checkout, how we do it,
the evolution and future of human reproduction.
Go to audible.com/radiolab or text Radiolab to 500 500 for a free 30 day trial
and a free audio book.